## 5.1 Introduction
- So far, we have defined database schemas and queries mathematically.
- SQL is a formal language for doing so with a DBMS.
- “Structured Query Language”, but it’s for more than writing queries.
- Two sub-parts:
	- DDL (Data Definition Language), for defining schemas.
	- DML (Data Manipulation Language), for writing queries and modifying the database.

- We’ll be working in PostgreSQL, an open-source relational DBMS.
- Learn your way around the documentation; it will be very helpful.
- Standards?
	- There are several, the most recent being SQL:2008.
	- The standards are not freely available. Must purchase from the International Standards Organization (ISO).
	- PostgreSQL supports most of it SQL:2008.
	- DBMSs vary in the details around the edges, making portability difficult

### 5.1.1 SELECT vs. $\sigma$
- In SQL, `SELECT` is for choosing columns (i.e., $\Pi$)
- Example:
```sql
SELECT surName
FROM Student
WHERE campus = 'StG';
```
- In relational algebra, "select" means choosing rows (i.e., $\sigma$)

### 5.1.2 A High Level Language
- SQL is a very high-level language.
	- Say “what” rather than “how.”
- You write queries without manipulating data. Contrast languages like Java or C++.
- Provides physical “data independence:”
	- Details of how the data is stored can change with no impact on your queries.
- You can focus on readability.
	- But because the DBMS optimizes your query, you get efficiency.

## 5.2 Basic Queries
**Meaning of a Query with One Relation**:
```sql
SELECT name
FROM Course
WHERE dept = 'CSC';
```
$\Pi_{name}(\sigma_{dept = "csc"} (Course))$

**And with Multiple Relations**:
```sql
SELECT name
FROM Offering, Took
WHERE Offering.id = Took.oid and dept = 'CSC';
```
$\Pi_{name}(\sigma_{Offering.id = Took.id \land dept = 'csc'} (Offering \times Took))$

### 5.2.1 Temporarily Renaming a Table
- You can rename tables (just for the duration of the statement):
```sql
SELECT e.name, d.name 
FROM employee e, department d 
WHERE d.name = ‘marketing’ 
AND e.name = ‘Horton’;
```
- Can be convenient bs the longer full names:
```sql
SELECT employee.name, department.name 
FROM employee, department 
WHERE department.name = ‘marketing’ 
AND employee.name = ‘Horton’;
```
- This is like $\rho$ in relational algebra

### 5.2.2 Self-Joins
- As we know, renaming is *required* for self-joins
- Example:
```sql
SELECT e1.name, e2.name 
FROM employee e1, employee e2 
WHERE e1.salary < e2.salary;
```

### 5.2.3 In SELECT Clauses
- A \* in the SELECT clause means "all attributes of this relation"
- Example:
```sql
SELECT *
FROM Course
WHERE dept = 'CSC';
```

### 5.2.4 Renaming Attributes
- Use `AS <new name>` to rename an attribute
- Example:
```sql
SELECT name AS title, dept
FROM Course
WHERE breadth;
```

### 5.2.5 Complex Conditions in a WHERE
- We can build boolean expressions with operators that produce boolean results
	- Comparison operators
	- Any many other operators
- Not that not equals is unusual: <>
- We can combine boolean expressions with
	- Boolean operators: AND, OR, NOT
- Example:
```sql
SELECT *
FROM Offering
WHERE dept = 'CSC' AND cnum >= 300;
```

### 5.2.6 ORDER BY
- To put the tuples in order, add this as the final clause: `ORDER BY <attribute list> [DESC]`
- The default is ascending order; DESC overrides it to force descending order
- The attribute list can include expressions: e.g., `ORDER BY sales+rentals`
- The ordering is the last thing done before the SELECT so all attributes are still available

### 5.2.7 Case-Sensitivity and Whitespace
- Example:
```sql
SELECT surName
FROM Student
WHERE campus = 'StG';
```
- Keywords like SELECT are not case-sensitive
	- One convention is to use uppercase for keywords
- Identifiers like Student are not case-sensitive either
	- One convention is to use lowercase for attributes and a leading capital letter followed by lowercase for relations
- Literal strings like `'StG'` are case sensitive and require single quotes
- Whitespace (other than inside quotes) is ignored

### 5.2.8 Expressions in SELECT Clauses
- Instead of a simple attribute name, you can use an expression in a SELECT clause
- Operands: attributes, constants
- Operators: arithmetic ops, string ops
- Examples:
```sql
SELECT sid, grade + 10, AS adjusted
FROM Took;

SELECT dept || cnum
FROM course;
```

### 5.2.9 Expressions that are a Constant
- Sometimes it makes sense for the whole expression to be a constant (something that doesn't involve any attributes!)
- Example:
```sql
SELECT dept, cNum, 'satisfies' AS breadthRequirement
FROM Course
WHERE breadth;
```

### 5.2.10 Pattern Operators
- 2 ways to compare string to a pattern by:
	- `<attribute> LIKE <pattern>`
	- `<attribute> NOT LIKE <pattern>`
- Pattern is a quoted string
	- `%` means any string
	- `_` means any single character
- Example:
```sql
SELECT *
FROM Course
WHERE name LIKE '%Comp%';
```

## 5.3 Aggregation and Grouping
### 5.3.1 Computing on a Column
 - We often want to compute something across the values in a column
 - `SUM`, `AVG`, `COUNT`, `MIN`, and `MAX` can be applied to a column in a `SELECT` clause
 - Also `COUNT(*)` counts the number of tuples
 - We call this aggregation
 - Not: To stop duplicates from contributing to the aggregation, use `DISTINCT` inside the brackets (Does not affect `MIN` or `MAX`)

### 5.3.2 Grouping
- If we follow a `SELECT-FROM-WHERE` expression with `GROUP BY <attributes>`
	- The tuples are grouped according to the values of those attributes
	- And any aggregation gives us a single value per group

### 5.3.3 Restrictions on Aggregation
- If any aggregation is used, then each element of the `SELECT` list must be either:
	- Aggregated or
	- An attribute on the `GROUP BY` list
- Otherwise it doesn't even make sense to include the attribute

## 5.4 Continuing on with SQL
### 5.4.1 HAVING Clauses
- `WHERE` let's you decide which tuples to keep
- Similarly you can decide with groups to keep 
- Syntax: `GROUP BY <attributes>`
	- `HAVING <condition>`
- Semantics: Only groups satisfying the condition are kept

### 5.4.2 Restrictions of HAVING Clauses
- Outside subqueries HAVING may refer to attributes only if they are either
	- Aggregated or
	- An attribute on the `GROUP BY` list
- Same requirement as for `SELECT` clauses with aggregation

## 5.5 Order in SQL
1. `FROM`: Assemble the tables
2. `WHERE`: Filter rows
3. `GROUP BY`: Organize into groups
4. `HAVING`: Filter the groups
5. `SELECT`: Report 1 row per group
6. `ORDER BY`: Order rows in result