**Where can a subquery go?**
- Relational algebra syntax is so elegant that it's easy to see where subqueries can go
- In SQL a bit more thought is required

## 6.1 Subqueries in a FROM Clause
- In place of a relation name in the `FROM` clause we can use a subquery
- The subquery must be parenthesized
- Must name the result, so you can refer to it in the outer query
- Ex.
```sql
SELECT sid, dept||cnum as course, grade 
FROM Took, 
	(SELECT * 
	FROM Offering 
	WHERE instructor=‘Horton’) Hoffering 
WHERE Took.oid = Hoffering.oid;
```
- This `FROM` is analogous to $Took \times \rho_{Hoffering} (subquery)$
- `||` is concatenation

## 6.2 Subquery as a Value in a WHERE
- If a subquery is guaranteed to produce exactly 1 tuple then the subquery can be used as a value
- Simplest situation: that 1 tuple has only 1 component
- Ex.
```sql
SELECT sid, surname
FROM Student
WHERE cgpa >
	(SELECT cgpa
	FROM Student
	WHERE sid = 99999);
```
- We can't do the analogous thing in RA:
	- $\Pi_{sid, surname} \sigma_{cgpa \gt (subquery)} Student$

## 6.3 Special Cases
- What is the subquery returns `NULL`?
	- Evaluated as not true
- What if the subquery could return more than 1 value?
	- Error
- When a subquery can return multiple values, we can make comparisons using a quantifier
- Ex.
```sql
SELECT sid, surname
FROM Student
WHERE cgpa >
	(SELECT cgpa
	FROM Student
	WHERE campus = ‘StG’);
```
- We can require that
	- `cgpa > all of them` or
	- `cgpa > at least one of them`

## 6.4 The Operator ANY
- Syntax:
	- `x <comparison> ANY (<subquery>)`
	- or equivalently `x <comparison> SOME (<subquery>)`
- Semantics:
	- Its value is true if and only if the comparison holds for at least 1 tuple in the subquery result, i.e., $∃ y ∈ «subquery results»| \times «comparison» y$ 
- $\times$ can be a *list* of attributes, but this feature is not supported by psql

## 6.5 The Operator IN
- Syntax:
	- `x IN (<subquery>)`
- Semantics:
	- Its value is true if and only if $\times$ is in the set of rows generated by the subquery
- $\times$ can be a list of attributes, and psql does support this feature
- Ex.
```sql
SELECT sid, dept||cnum AS course, grade
FROM Took NATURAL JOIN Offering
WHERE
	grade >= 80 AND
	(cnum, dept) IN (
	SELECT cnum, dept
	FROM Took NATURAL JOIN Offering
	NATURAL JOIN Student
	WHERE surname = 'Lakemeyer');
```

## 6.6 The Operator EXISTS
- Syntax:
	- `EXISTS (<subquery>)`
- Semantics:
	- Its value is true if and only if the subquery has at least 1 tuple
- Read it as "exists a row in the subquery result"
- Ex.
```sql
SELECT surname, cgpa
FROM Student
WHERE EXISTS (
	SELECT *
	FROM Took
	WHERE Student.sid = Took.sid and
	grade > 85 );
```

## 6.7 Summary
x «comparison» ALL («subquery»)
 $∀ y ∈ «subquery results»⎮ x «comparison» y
 
x «comparison» SOME («subquery»)
∃ y ∈ «subquery results»⎮ x «comparison» y

x IN («subquery»)
 Same as x = SOME («subquery»)
 
x NOT IN («subquery»)
 Same as x <> ALL («subquery»)
 
EXISTS («subquery»)
 ∃ y ∈ «subquery results»

**Where Subqueries can go**:
- As a relation in a `FROM` clause
- As a value in a `WHERE` clause
- With `ANY`, `ALL`, `IN`, or `EXISTS` in a `WHERE` clause
- As operands to `UNION`, `INTERSECT`, or `EXCEPT`

## 6.8 Scope
- If a name might refer to more than one thing, use the most closely nested one. 
- If a subquery refers only to names defined inside it, it can be evaluated once and used repeatedly in the outer query.
- If it refers to any name defined outside of itself, it must be evaluated *once for each tuple in the outer query*. These are called **correlated subqueries**.

- Renaming can make scope explicit:
```sql
SELECT instructor
FROM Offering Off1
WHERE NOT EXISTS (
	SELECT *
	FROM Offering Off2
	WHERE
	Off2.oid <> Off1.oid AND
	Off2.instructor = Off1.instructor );
```
