## 7.1 Set Operations
- Tables can have duplicates in SQL
	- A table can hold duplicate rows, unless this would violate an integrity constraint
	- SELECT-FROM-WHERE statements
		- Can create new duplicates
		- Leave any duplicates in unless you say not to
	- Why?
		- Getting rid of duplicates is expensive!
		- We may want the duplicates because they tell us how many times something occurred

- SQL treats tables as "bags" (or "multisets") rather than sets
- Just like sets but duplicates are allowed
	- {6,3,7,2,9} is a set and a bag
	- {6,2,2,7,1,9} is not a set but is a bag
	- As with sets order does not matter

**Union**: `(<subquery>) UNION (<subquery>)`

**Intersection**: `(<subquery>) INTERSECT (<subquery>)`

**Difference**: `(<subquery>) EXCEPT (<subquery>)`

- The brackets are mandatory
- The operands must be queries; you can't simply use a relation name
- Ex.
```sql
(SELECT sid
FROM Took
WHERE grade > 95)
	UNION
(SELECT sid
FROM Took
WHERE grade < 50);
```

**Operations ∪, ∩, and − with Bags**
1. {1, 1, 1, 3, 7, 7, 8} ∪ {1, 5, 7, 7, 8, 8}  
2. {1, 1, 1, 3, 7, 7, 8} ∩ {1, 5, 7, 7, 8, 8}  
3. {1, 1, 1, 3, 7, 7, 8} − {1, 5, 7, 7, 8, 8}

**Bag vs Set Semantics: Which is Used**
- We saw that a SELECT-FROM-WHERE statement uses bag semantics by default
	- Duplicates are kept in the result
- The set operations use set semantics by default
	- Duplicates are *eliminated* from the result

**Motivation: Efficiency**
- When doing projection it is easier not to eliminate duplicates
	- Just work one tuple at a time
- For intersection or difference it is most efficient to sort the relations first
	- At that point you may as well eliminate the duplicates anyway

**Controlling Duplicate Elimination**
- We can force the result of a SFW query to be a set using `SELECT DISTINCT`
	- Cannot be used on multiple columns
	- `DISTINCT` can be used in aggregates multiple times
		- Ex. `SELECT count(distinct dept), count(distinct instructor)`
- We can force the result of a set operation to be a bag using `ALL`
- Ex.
```sql
(SELECT sid  
FROM Took  
WHERE grade > 95)  
	UNION ALL  
(SELECT sid  
FROM Took  
WHERE grade < 50);
```

## 7.2 Views
- A view is a relation defined in terms of stored tables (called base tables) and other views
- Access a view like any base table
- 2 kinds of view:
	1. **Virtual**: No tuples are stored; view is just a query for constructing the relation when needed
	2. **Materialized**: Actually constructed and stored. Expensive to maintain!
- We'll use only virtual views
- Ex. A view for students who earned an 80 or higher in a CSC course:
```sql
CREATE VIEW topresults AS  
SELECT firstname, surname, cnum  
FROM Student, Took, Offering  
WHERE  
	Student.sid = Took.sid AND  
	Took.oid = Offering.oid AND  
	grade >= 80 AND dept = 'CSC';
```

**Uses for Views**
- Break down a large query
- Provide another way of looking at the same data, e.g., for one category of user