## 9.1 Impact of Having NULL Values
**Missing Information**
- 2 common scenarios:
	1. Missing value
		- E.g., we know a student has some email address, but we don't know what it is
	2. Inapplicable attribute
		- E.g., the value of attribute spouse is inapplicable for an unmarried person

**Representing Missing Information**
- One possibility: use special value as a place holder
	- If age is unknown use 0
	- If `StNum` unknown use 99999999
- Better solution: use a value not in any domain. We call this a null value
- Tuples in SQL relations can have `NULL` as a value for one or more components

**Checking for NULL Values**
- You can compare an attribute value to `NULL` with
	- `IS NULL`
	- `IS NOT NULL`
- Ex. 
```sql 
SELECT *  
FROM Course  
WHERE breadth IS NULL;
```

- In SQL we have 3 truth-values
	- Because of `NULL`, we need 3 truth-values:
		- If one or both operands to a comparison is `NULL` the comparison *always* evaluates to `UNKNOWN`
		- Otherwise, comparison evaluate to `TRUE` or `FALSE`

**Combining Truth Values**
- We need to know how the 3 truth-values  combine with `AND`, `OR` and `NOT`
- Can think of it in terms of the truth table
- Or can think in terms of numbers
	- `TRUE = 1, FALSE = 0, UNKNOWN = 0.5`
	- `AND` is min, `OR` is max
	- `NOT` x is (1-x), i.e., it "flips" the value

##### The Three-Valued Truth Table
| A | B | A and B | A or B |
| ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| T | T | T | T |
| TF | FT | F | T |
| F | F | F | F |
| TU | UT | U | T |
| FU | UF | F | U |
| U | U | U | U |

| A | not A |
| ---- | ---- |
| T | F |
| F | T |
| U | U |

**Surprises from 3-Valued Logic**
- Some laws you are used to still hold in 3-valued logic.
	- Ex. `AND` is commutative
- But others don't.
	- Ex. The law of the excluded middle breaks: `(p or (NOT p))` might not be `TRUE`
	- `(0*x)` might not be `0`

**Impact of NULL values on WHERE**
- A tuple is in a query result if and only if the `WHERE` clause is `TRUE`
- `UNKNOWN` is not good enough
- `WHERE` is picky

**Impact of NULL Values on Aggregation**
- Summary: Aggregation ignores `NULL`
	- `NULL` never contributes to a sum, average or count
	- Can never be the minimum or the maximum of a column (unless every value is `NULL`)
- If there are no non-`NULL` values in a column, then the result of the aggregation is `NULL`
	- Exception: `COUNT` of an empty set is 0

|  | some nulls in A | all nulls in A |
| ---- | ---- | ---- |
| min(A) |  | null |
| max(A) |  | null |
| sum(A) |  | null |
| avg(A) |  | null |
| count(A) |  | 0 |
| count(*) | all tuples count | all tuples count |

**More About the Impact of Null Values**
- Other corner cases to think about:
	- `SELECT DISTINCT`: are 2 `NULL` values equal
	- Natural join: are 2 `NULL` values equal?
	- Set Operations: are 2 `NULL` values equal?
- And later when we learn about constraints:
	- `UNIQUE` constraint: do 2 `NULL` values violate?
- This behaviour may vary across DBMSs

## 9.2 Summary
- Any comparison will `NULL` yields `UNKNOWN`
- `WHERE` is picky only accepts `TRUE`
- Therefore, `NATURAL JOIN` is picky too
- Aggregation ignores `NULL`
- In other situations where `NULL`s matter
	- When a truth-table may be `NULL`
	- When it matters whether 2 `NULL` are considered the same
- Don't assume. Behaviour may vary by DBMS